Astro 4.10 blog post (#1116)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-4100.mdx

```js
import { getSecret } from 'astro:env/server';

function getServerEndpoint(num: number) {
  return getSecret('BACKUP_SERVER_' + num);
}
```

## Rewrite for all HTTP methods

Rewrites is a new experimental feature released in 4.9. The first version targeted `GET` requests, the most common case for a rewrite. Now in 4.10 rewrites can be used to change the route for any requests, which it does by cloning the initial request.

A use-case would be having a versioned API with a default version that you rewrite in middleware:

```js
import { defineMiddleware } from 'astro:middleware';

// `context` and `next` are automatically typed
export const onRequest = defineMiddleware(({ request, url }, next) => {
  if(request.method === 'POST' && url.pathname === '/api') {
    return next('/api/v2');
  }
});
```

When rewriting a new request is created pointing to the new URL. The existing headers and body are copied over to the new request.

> ## Embedding Astro

Reviewer: Maybe we could add a new chapter about people should load renderers, this changed now: https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/feat/load-renderers/.changeset/fair-singers-reflect.md

Author: Sarah beat me to it.

We always knew people would want to use the container API in other ways. In 4.10 it's now possible to use the container API to render built __production__ components. To demonstrate it, we built a [PHP demo](https://github.com/matthewp/astro-in-php-example) app. Don't judge the code, PHP experts 😅

The container part looks like this:

```js
import * as components from './dist/server/all.mjs';
import { renderers } from './dist/server/renderers.mjs';
import { manifest } from './dist/server/entry.mjs';
import { experimental_AstroContainer as AstroContainer } from 'astro/container';

const container = await AstroContainer.create({
  manifest,
  renderers,
  resolve(s) {
    const found = manifest.entryModules[s];
    if(found) {
      return `/astro-project/dist/client/${found}`;
    }
    return found;
  }
});

const html = await container.renderToString(components.ReactWrapper);
console.log(html);
```

The Container API is low-level and reflects what Astro does internally to render its own routes. We're hopeful that integrations get built that smooths over the rough edges and provides simpler way to embed Astro.

> ## Bug Fixes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Renderer helper functions

We also added some convenient helper functions for using the Container API in Vite environments (`vitest`, Astro integrations, etc.) when rendering your UI framework components.

This means you no longer need to know (or figure out!) the individual, direct file paths to the client and server rendering scripts for each package. The new `getContainerRenderer()` provides the appropriate rendering scripts from our official renderer integration packages (`@astrojs/react`, `@astrojs/preact`, `@astrojs/solid-js`, `@astrojs/svelte`, `@astrojs/vue`, `@astrojs/lit`, and `@astrojs/mdx`). Be sure to upgrade your integrations at the same time to have this new function!

The `loadRenderers()` function from the new `astro:container` virtual module will load these renderers from each package for you:

```diff
import { experimental_AstroContainer as AstroContainer } from 'astro/container';
import ReactWrapper from '../src/components/ReactWrapper.astro';
import { loadRenderers } from "astro:container";
import { getContainerRenderer } from "@astrojs/react";

test('ReactWrapper with react renderer', async () => {
+ const renderers = await loadRenderers([getContainerRenderer()])
- const renderers = [
- {
-  name: '@astrojs/react',
-   clientEntrypoint: '@astrojs/react/client.js',
-   serverEntrypoint: '@astrojs/react/server.js',
-  },
- ];
  const container = await AstroContainer.create({
    renderers,
  });
  const result = await container.renderToString(ReactWrapper);

  expect(result).toContain('Counter');
  expect(result).toContain('Count: <!-- -->5');
});
```

This type change to `renderers` will also allow Vite-less environments to load and pass the renderer modules manually.

For more information, see the [Container API docs](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/container-reference/).

## Bug Fixes
```

---
title: "Astro 4.10"
description: "Astro 4.10 is out with experimental type-safe environment variables."
publishDate: "June 4, 2024"
authors:
  - erika
  - ema
  - matthew
  - nate
  - bjorn
  - sarah
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-4100/header-astro-4.10.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-4100/og-image-4.10.webp"
lang: "en"
---

import BlogSummary from "/src/components/BlogSummary.astro";

<BlogSummary>
  Astro 4.10 is out with experimental type-safe environment variables
</BlogSummary>

Full release highlights include:

> - [**Experimental: astro:env module**](#experimental-astro-env-module)
> - [**Rewrite for all HTTP methods**](#rewrite-for-all-http-methods)
> - [**Embedding Astro in server frameworks**](#embedding-astro)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**Experimental: astro:env module**](#experimental-astro-env)
- [**Rewrite for all HTTP methods**](#rewrite-for-all-http-methods)
- [**Embedding Astro in server frameworks**](#embedding-astro)
- [**Renderer helper functions**](#renderer-helper-functions)
```

---
title: "Astro 4.10"
description: "Astro 4.10 is out with experimental type-safe environment variables."

> publishDate: "June 4, 2024"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
publishDate: "June 6, 2024"
```
I guess? Not sure 😅

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental: astro:env

Astro 4.10 introduces a new experimental built-in module, `astro:env`.

Environment variables allow you to configure your app with different values in different environments. But this comes with a great deal of complexity:

- Some variables are used in the client and some only on the server.
- Server variables are often __secrets__, things like API keys that you absolutely do not want exposed in the client, and you also do not want inlined into the server build either (which can be viewed by anyone with access to the build output).
- Some variables are __required__ for your app to function at all; whereas other are optional enhancements.
- Runtimes such as Cloudflare and Deno have different APIs for reading variables, creating a dev/prod difference you need to deal with.

We built `astro:env` to provide more control and structure over environment variables. Here's how you might define a schema for them in your config:

```js
import { defineConfig, envField } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({

>   env: {

Reviewer 3: Should be nested under `experimental`

>     schema: {

Reviewer 3: What about also showing server public and boolean?

>       DATABASE_URL: envField.string({

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      PUBLIC_STRIPE_KEY: envField.string({
```

        context: 'client',
        access: 'public'
      }),

>       API_PORT: envField.number({
>         context: 'server',
>         access: 'secret',
>         default: 7000
>       })

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2: envField.boolean({
        context: 'server',
        access: 'public',
        default: false
      }),
      API_PORT: envField.number({
        context: 'server',
        access: 'secret',
        default: 7000
      })
```

    }
  }
})
```

Once defined you can use your variables by importing them from the `astro:env` module like so:

```js

> import { API_PORT } from 'astro:env/server';

Reviewer 3: What about showing usage of all type of vars?

Reviewer 3: Yeah I can come up with some examples

> ```js
> import { API_PORT } from 'astro:env/server';
> 
> // API_PORT is a number
> // ...
> ```

Reviewer 3: ``````suggestion
```js
import { PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2, getSecret } from 'astro:env/server';

if (PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2) {
	const API_PORT = getSecret("API_PORT") // number
	await fetch(`https://my-secret-api.com:${API_PORT}/v2`)
}
```
``````

> 

Reviewer 3: ``````suggestion

```html
<script>
  import { PUBLIC_STRIPE_KEY } from 'astro:env/client';
  import { loadStripe } from '@stripe/stripe-js'; 
  const stripe = await loadStripe(PUBLIC_STRIPE_KEY);
  // ...
</script>
```

``````

> Some times you still want to read a variable that is not defined in the schema. This might be because the variable name is dynamic itself such as `BACK_SERVER_1` and `BACK_SERVER_2`, for example. Or it might be because you are reading variables inside of an Astro integration and don't want to impose the schema onto the app. In these cases `getSecret` is available to read runtime variables and works with any runtime (Cloudflare, Node.js, Deno).

Reviewer 3: This is not true. It's not possible to use `astro:env` from inside an integration because it's a virtual module. This is in the "Future ideas" section of the RFC

Author: Not inside of an integration but inside of an app that uses Cloudflare as its adapter. Is that not true?

Reviewer 3: My comment was about this in particular, can you explain a bit more?

> Or it might be because you are reading variables inside of an Astro integration and don't want to impose the schema onto the app

```js
import { getSecret } from 'astro:env/server';

function getServerEndpoint(num: number) {

>   return getSecret('BACKUP_SERVER_' + num);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  return getSecret(`BACKUP_SERVER_${num}`); // string | undefined
```

}
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Feels a bit weird to ask 😅 but is it possible to get my name in there, like Ming-jun Lu in 4.6 or Oliver in 4.4?

Author: Yes absolutely! Did so here: https://github.com/withastro/astro.build/pull/1116/commits/dc36fb307d0112a4f9f7291b7b951957fceb81d1

- Runtimes such as Cloudflare and Deno have different APIs for reading variables, creating a dev/prod difference you need to deal with.

We built `astro:env` to provide more control and structure over environment variables. Here's how you might define a schema for them in your config:

```js
import { defineConfig, envField } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    env: {
      schema: {
        API_PORT: envField.number({
          context: 'server',
          access: 'secret',
          default: 7000
        }),
        PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2: envField.boolean({
          context: 'server',
          access: 'public',
          default: false
        }),
      }
    }
  }
})
```

Once defined you can use your variables by importing them from the `astro:env/server` and `astro:env/client` modules like so:

```js
import { PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2, getSecret } from 'astro:env/server';

if (PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2) {
	const API_PORT = getSecret("API_PORT") // number
	await fetch(`https://my-secret-api.com:${API_PORT}/v2`)
}
```

Or in a client component, like so:

> ```jsx

Reviewer 3: My suggestion was not showing usage in jsx because, from what I saw with astro actions, many people were wondering if it was supposed to work in vue etc.

My suggestion is to
1. Specify explicitly it works no matter the ui fw, it's just JS!
2. Don't show usage with a specific ui framework but with an astro script (definitely debatable)

  return (
    <section>
      { SOME_FEATURE_FLAG && (
        <div id="fancy-enhanced-feature"></div>
      )}

      ...
    </section>
  )
}
```

Some times you still want to read a variable that is not defined in the schema. This might be because the variable name is dynamic itself such as `BACKUP_SERVER_1` and `BACKUP_SERVER_2`, for example. Or it might be because you are reading variables inside of an Astro integration and don't want to impose the schema onto the app. In these cases `getSecret` is available to read runtime variables and works with any runtime (Cloudflare, Node.js, Deno).

```js
import { getSecret } from 'astro:env/server';

function getServerEndpoint(num: number) {
  return getSecret(`BACKUP_SERVER_${num}`); // string | undefined
}
```

`astro:env` is an experimental feature and is subject to change as with all experimental features. Thanks to [Florian Lefebvre](https://github.com/florian-lefebvre) for being the champion of the RFC and providing the implementation. Leave your feedback on the [RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/894) and it will be taken into account as the feature is stabilized.

## Rewrite for all HTTP methods

> Rewrites is a new experimental feature released in 4.9. The first version targeted `GET` requests, the most common case for a rewrite. Now in 4.10 rewrites can be used to change the route for any requests, which it does by cloning the initial request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rewriting is a new experimental feature released in 4.9. The first version targeted `GET` requests, the most common case for a rewrite. Now in 4.10 rewrites can be used to change the route for any requests, which it does by cloning the initial request.
```

A use-case would be having a versioned API with a default version that you rewrite in middleware:

```js
import { defineMiddleware } from 'astro:middleware';

> // `context` and `next` are automatically typed

Reviewer 3: Is that really needed?

export const onRequest = defineMiddleware(({ request, url }, next) => {

>   if(request.method === 'POST' && url.pathname === '/api') {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  if(request.method === 'POST' && url.pathname.startsWith('/api')) {
```

    return next('/api/v2');
  }
});
```

> When rewriting a new request is created pointing to the new URL. The existing headers and body are copied over to the new request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When rewriting, a new request is created pointing to the new URL. The existing headers and body are copied over to the new request.
```

## Embedding Astro

In 4.9 we introduced the Container API, a new way to render Astro components outside of the context of the Astro framework. Our initial focus was on the __testing__ story. You can now use the container API to test Astro components. Create a container, render a component with `container.renderToString` and inspect the generated HTML.

> We always knew people would want to use the container API in other ways. In 4.10 it's now possible to use the container API to render built __production__ components. To demonstrate it, we built a [PHP demo](https://github.com/matthewp/astro-in-php-example) app. Don't judge the code, PHP experts 😅

Reviewer 3: I don't understand what "production components" is supposed to mean

The container part looks like this:

```js
import * as components from './dist/server/all.mjs';
import { renderers } from './dist/server/renderers.mjs';
import { manifest } from './dist/server/entry.mjs';
import { experimental_AstroContainer as AstroContainer } from 'astro/container';

const container = await AstroContainer.create({
  manifest,
  renderers,
  resolve(s) {
    const found = manifest.entryModules[s];
    if(found) {
      return `/astro-project/dist/client/${found}`;
    }
    return found;
  }
});

const html = await container.renderToString(components.ReactWrapper);

> console.log(html);

Reviewer 3: Maybe worth adding a little comment to explain why it's needed?

```

> The Container API is low-level and reflects what Astro does internally to render its own routes. We're hopeful that integrations get built that smooths over the rough edges and provides simpler way to embed Astro.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Container API is low-level and reflects what Astro does internally to render its own routes. We're hopeful that integrations get built that smooths over the rough edges and provides simpler ways to embed Astro.
```

---
title: "Astro 4.10"
description: "Astro 4.10 is out with experimental type-safe environment variables, as well as enhancements to the Container API and Rewrites."
publishDate: "June 6, 2024"
authors:
  - matthew
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-4100/header-astro-4.10.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-4100/og-image-4.10.webp"
lang: "en"
---

import BlogSummary from "/src/components/BlogSummary.astro";

<BlogSummary>
  Astro 4.10 is out with experimental type-safe environment variables, as well as enhancements to the Container API and Rewrites.
</BlogSummary>

Full release highlights include:

> - [**Experimental: astro:env module**](#experimental-astro-env)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**Experimental: astro:env module**](#experimental-astroenv)
```

- [**Rewrite for all HTTP methods**](#rewrite-for-all-http-methods)
- [**Embedding Astro in server frameworks**](#embedding-astro)
- [**Container API helpers**](#container-api-helpers)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Experimental: astro:env

Astro 4.10 introduces a new experimental built-in module, `astro:env`, to allow easier use of environment variables.

Environment variables allow you to configure your app with different values in different environments. But this comes with a great deal of complexity:

- Some variables are needed in the client and some only on the server.

> - Server variables are often __secrets__, things like API keys that you absolutely do not want exposed in the client, and you also do not want inlined into the server build either (which can be viewed by anyone with access to the build output).

Reviewer 4: I believe we can shorten this sentence a bit.
```suggestion
- Server variables are often __secrets__, things like API keys that you do not want to be exposed in the client nor inlined into the server build (which can be viewed by anyone with access to the build output).
```

```js
import { defineConfig, envField } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    env: {
      schema: {
        API_PORT: envField.number({
          context: 'server',
          access: 'secret',
          default: 7000
        }),
        PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2: envField.boolean({
          context: 'server',
          access: 'public',
          default: false
        }),
      }
    }
  }
})
```

Once defined you can use your variables by importing them from the `astro:env/server` and `astro:env/client` modules like so:

```js
import { PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2, getSecret } from 'astro:env/server';

if (PUBLIC_DASHBOARD_V2) {
	const API_PORT = getSecret("API_PORT") // number
	await fetch(`https://my-secret-api.com:${API_PORT}/v2`)
}
```

Client-side `astro:env/client` can be used in components, scripts, or anywhere else you run client code. For example:

```jsx
import { SOME_FEATURE_FLAG } from 'astro:env/client';

export default function() {
  return (
    <section>
      { SOME_FEATURE_FLAG && (
        <div id="fancy-enhanced-feature"></div>
      )}

      ...
    </section>
  )
}
```

> Some times you still want to read a variable that is not defined in the schema. In these cases `getSecret` is available to read runtime variables and works with any runtime (Cloudflare, Node.js, Deno).

Reviewer 4: I believe here the correct would be Sometimes (one word), also, we are being a bit inconsistent with including the parenthesis for function names referenced in the text, I think we should use it for all cases.
```suggestion
Sometimes, you still want to read a variable that is not defined in the schema. In these cases, `getSecret()` is available to read runtime variables and works with any runtime (Cloudflare, Node.js, Deno).
```

> Sometimes, you still want to read a variable that is not defined in the schema. In these cases, `getSecret()` is available to read runtime variables and works with any runtime (Cloudflare, Node.js, Deno).

Author: ```suggestion
When you need to read a variable that is not defined in your schema, use getSecret(), which works in any runtime (Cloudflare, Node.js, Deno).
```

```js
import { getSecret } from 'astro:env/server';

function getServerEndpoint(num: number) {
  return getSecret(`BACKUP_SERVER_${num}`); // string | undefined
}
```

`astro:env` is an experimental feature and is subject to change as with all experimental features. Thanks to [Florian Lefebvre](https://github.com/florian-lefebvre) for being the champion of the RFC and providing the implementation. Leave your feedback on the [RFC](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap/pull/894) and it will be taken into account as the feature is stabilized.

## Rewrite for all HTTP methods

Rewriting is a new experimental feature released in 4.9. The first version targeted `GET` requests, the most common case for a rewrite. Now in 4.10 rewrites can be used to change the route for any requests, which it does by cloning the initial request.

> A use-case would be having a versioned API with a default version that you rewrite in middleware:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's an example of rewriting in middleware to direct you to the default version of a versioned API:
```

```js
import { defineMiddleware } from 'astro:middleware';

export const onRequest = defineMiddleware(({ request, url }, next) => {
  if(request.method === 'POST' && url.pathname === '/api') {
    return next('/api/v2');
  }
});
```

When rewriting, a new request is created pointing to the new URL. The existing headers and body are copied over to the new request.

## Embedding Astro

> In 4.9 we introduced the Container API, a new way to render Astro components outside of the context of the Astro framework. Our initial focus was on the __testing__ story. You can now use the container API to test Astro components. Create a container, render a component with `container.renderToString()`, and inspect the generated HTML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 4.9 we introduced the Container API, a new way to render Astro components outside of the context of the Astro framework. Our initial focus was on the __testing__ story: using the container API to test Astro components. Create a container, render a component with `container.renderToString()`, and inspect the generated HTML.
```

> In 4.9 we introduced the Container API, a new way to render Astro components outside of the context of the Astro framework. Our initial focus was on the __testing__ story. You can now use the container API to test Astro components. Create a container, render a component with `container.renderToString` and inspect the generated HTML.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In 4.9 we introduced the Container API, a new way to render Astro components outside of the context of the Astro framework. Our initial focus was on the __testing__ story. You can now use the container API to test Astro components. Create a container, render a component with `container.renderToString()`, and inspect the generated HTML.
```

> We always knew people would want to use the container API in other ways. In 4.10 it's now possible to use the container API to render components built with `astro build`, meaning you can use them outside of an Astro site.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We always knew people would want to use the Container API in other ways, and we didn't intend to disappoint. In 4.10, you can now use this API to render any components built with `astro build`, meaning you can use them outside of an Astro site!
```

> To demonstrate it, we built a [PHP demo](https://github.com/matthewp/astro-in-php-example) app. Don't judge the code, PHP experts 😅

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To demonstrate how this works, we built an [Astro-in-PHP demo](https://github.com/matthewp/astro-in-php-example) app. Don't judge the code, PHP experts! 😅
```

The container part looks like this:

```js
import * as components from './dist/server/all.mjs';
import { renderers } from './dist/server/renderers.mjs';
import { manifest } from './dist/server/entry.mjs';
import { experimental_AstroContainer as AstroContainer } from 'astro/container';

const container = await AstroContainer.create({
  manifest,
  renderers,
  resolve(s) {
    const found = manifest.entryModules[s];
    if(found) {
      return `/astro-project/dist/client/${found}`;
    }
    return found;
  }
});

const html = await container.renderToString(components.ReactWrapper);

// Log to the console so that PHP injects the HTML into its page.
console.log(html);
```

> The Container API is low-level and reflects what Astro does internally to render its own routes. We're hopeful that integrations get built that smooths over the rough edges and provides simpler ways to embed Astro.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Container API is low-level and reflects what Astro does internally to render its own routes. We're eager for the community to build integrations that smooth over the rough edges and provide simpler ways to embed Astro. Try it for yourself, and show us everywhere you add Astro!
```
